interfaces.md, before:

# sqloquent.interfaces

## Classes

### `CursorProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface showing how a DB cursor should function.

#### Methods

##### `execute(sql: str, parameters: list[str] = []) -> CursorProtocol:`

Execute a single query with the given parameters.

##### `executemany(sql: str, seq_of_parameters: Iterable[list[str]] = []) -> CursorProtocol:`

Execute a query once for each list of parameters.

##### `executescript(sql: str) -> CursorProtocol:`

Execute a SQL script without parameters. No implicit transaciton handling.

##### `fetchone() -> Any:`

Get one record returned by the previous query.

##### `fetchall() -> Any:`

Get all records returned by the previous query.

### `DBContextProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface showing how a context manager for connecting to a database should
behave.

### `ModelProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface showing how a model should function.

#### Properties

- table: Str with the name of the table.
- id_column: Str with the name of the id column.
- columns: Tuple of str column names.
- data: Dict for storing model data.

#### Methods

##### `@classmethod find(id: Any) -> Optional[ModelProtocol]:`

Find a record by its id and return it. Return None if it does not exist.

##### `@classmethod insert(data: dict) -> Optional[ModelProtocol]:`

Insert a new record to the datastore. Return instance.

##### `@classmethod insert_many(items: list[dict]) -> int:`

Insert a batch of records and return the number of items inserted.

##### `update(updates: dict, conditions: dict = None) -> ModelProtocol:`

Persist the specified changes to the datastore. Return self in monad pattern.

##### `save() -> ModelProtocol:`

Persist to the datastore. Return self in monad pattern.

##### `delete() -> None:`

Delete the record.

##### `reload() -> ModelProtocol:`

Reload values from datastore. Return self in monad pattern.

##### `@classmethod query(conditions: dict = None) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Return a QueryBuilderProtocol for the model.

### `JoinedModelProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface for representations of JOIN query results.

#### Properties

- data: Dict for storing models data.

#### Methods

##### `@staticmethod parse_data(models: list[Type[ModelProtocol]], data: dict) -> dict:`

Parse data of form {table.column:value} to {table:{column:value}}.

##### `get_models() -> list[ModelProtocol]:`

Returns the underlying models.

### `RowProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface for a generic row representation.

#### Properties

- data: Returns the underlying row data.

### `QueryBuilderProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface showing how a query builder should function.

#### Properties

- model: The class of the relevant model.

#### Methods

##### `equal(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column = data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `not_equal(column: str, data: Any) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column != data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `less(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column < data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `greater(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column > data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `starts_with(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column like data%' clause and param, then return self.

##### `contains(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column like %data%' clause and param, then return self.

##### `excludes(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column not like %data%' clause and param, then return self.

##### `ends_with(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column like %data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `is_in(column: str, data: Union[tuple, list]) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column in data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `order_by(column: str, direction: str = 'desc') -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Sets query order.

##### `skip(offset: int) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Sets the number of rows to skip.

##### `reset() -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Returns a fresh instance using the configured model.

##### `insert(data: dict) -> Optional[ModelProtocol]:`

Insert a record and return a model instance.

##### `insert_many(items: list[dict]) -> int:`

Insert a batch of records and return the number inserted.

##### `find(id: str) -> Optional[ModelProtocol]:`

Find a record by its id and return it.

##### `join(model: Type[ModelProtocol] | list[Type[ModelProtocol]], on: list[str], kind: str = 'inner') -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Prepares the query for a join over multiple tables/models.

##### `select(columns: list[str]) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Sets the columns to select.

##### `group(by: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Adds a group by constraint.

##### `get() -> list[ModelProtocol] | list[JoinedModelProtocol] | list[RowProtocol]:`

Run the query on the datastore and return a list of results. Return SqlModels
when running a simple query. Return JoinedModels when running a JOIN query.
Return Rows when running a non-joined GROUP BY query.

##### `count() -> int:`

Returns the number of records matching the query.

##### `take(number: int) -> Optional[list[ModelProtocol]]:`

Takes the specified number of rows.

##### `chunk(number: int) -> Generator[list[ModelProtocol], None, None]:`

Chunk all matching rows the specified number of rows at a time.

##### `first() -> Optional[ModelProtocol]:`

Run the query on the datastore and return the first result.

##### `update(updates: dict, conditions: dict = {}) -> int:`

Update the datastore and return number of records updated.

##### `delete() -> int:`

Delete the records that match the query and return the number of deleted
records.

##### `to_sql() -> str:`

Return the sql where clause from the clauses and params.

##### `execute_raw(sql: str) -> tuple[int, Any]:`

Execute raw SQL against the database. Return rowcount and fetchall results.

### `RelationProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface showing how a relation should function.

#### Properties

- primary: Property that accesses the primary instance.
- secondary: Property that accesses the secondary instance(s).

#### Methods

##### `@staticmethod single_model_precondition() -> None:`

Checks preconditions for a model.

##### `@staticmethod multi_model_precondition() -> None:`

Checks preconditions for list/tuple of models.

##### `primary_model_precondition(primary: ModelProtocol) -> None:`

Checks that primary is instance of self.primary_class.

##### `secondary_model_precondition(secondary: ModelProtocol) -> None:`

Checks that secondary is instance of self.secondary_class.

##### `@staticmethod pivot_preconditions(pivot: Type[ModelProtocol]) -> None:`

Checks preconditions for a pivot.

##### `save() -> None:`

Save the relation by setting/unsetting relevant database values.

##### `reload() -> None:`

Reload the secondary models from the database.

##### `get_cache_key() -> str:`

Get the cache key for the relation.

##### `create_property() -> property:`

Produces a property to be set on a model, allowing it to access the related
model through the relation.

### `ColumnProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface for a column class (for migrations).

#### Properties

- name: The name of the column.
- is_nullable: Whether or not the column can be null.

#### Methods

##### `validate() -> None:`

Should raise an exception if the column specification is invalid.

##### `not_null() -> ColumnProtocol:`

Disable null values for this column.

##### `nullable() -> ColumnProtocol:`

Enable null values for this column.

##### `index() -> ColumnProtocol:`

Should generate a simple index for this column.

##### `unique() -> ColumnProtocol:`

Should generate a unique index for this column.

##### `drop() -> ColumnProtocol:`

Should drop the column from the table.

##### `rename(new_name: str) -> ColumnProtocol:`

Should rename the column.

### `TableProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface for a table class (for migrations).

#### Properties

- name: The name of the table.

#### Methods

##### `@classmethod create(name: str) -> TableProtocol:`

For creating a table.

##### `@classmethod alter(name: str) -> TableProtocol:`

For altering a table.

##### `@classmethod drop(name: str) -> TableProtocol:`

For dropping a table.

##### `rename(name: str) -> TableProtocol:`

Rename the table.

##### `index(columns: list[ColumnProtocol | str]) -> TableProtocol:`

Create a simple index or a composite index.

##### `drop_index(columns: list[ColumnProtocol | str]) -> TableProtocol:`

Drop a simple index or a composite index.

##### `unique(columns: list[ColumnProtocol | str]) -> TableProtocol:`

Create a simple unique index or a composite unique index.

##### `drop_unique(columns: list[ColumnProtocol | str]) -> TableProtocol:`

Drop a simple unique index or a composite unique index.

##### `drop_column(column: ColumnProtocol | str) -> TableProtocol:`

Drop the specified column.

##### `rename_column(column: ColumnProtocol | list[str]) -> TableProtocol:`

Rename the specified column.

##### `custom(callback: Callable[[list[str]], list[str]]) -> TableProtocol:`

Add a custom callback that parses the SQL clauses before they are returnedf from
the `sql` method. Must accept and return list[str]. This is a way to add custom
SQL while still using the migration system. Return self in monad pattern.

##### `sql() -> list[str]:`

Return the SQL for the table structure changes.

### `MigrationProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface for a migration class.

#### Properties

- connection_info: The connection info used for interacting with the database.
For sqlite migrations, this is passed to the model_factory which is in turn
passed to the DBContextManager. For other database bindings, the connection
information should be read from env and injected into the relevant
DBContextManager.

#### Methods

##### `up(callback: Callable[[], list[TableProtocol]]) -> None:`

Specify the forward migration. May be called multiple times for multi-step
migrations.

##### `down(callback: Callable[[], list[TableProtocol]]) -> None:`

Specify the backward migration. May be called multiple times for multi-step
migrations.

##### `get_apply_sql() -> None:`

Get the SQL for the forward migration. Note that this may call all registered
callbacks and result in unexpected behavior.

##### `apply() -> None:`

Apply the forward migration.

##### `get_undo_sql() -> None:`

Get the SQL for the backward migration. Note that this may call all registered
callbacks and result in unexpected behavior.

##### `undo() -> None:`

Apply the backward migration.

Commit message:

query builder now usable without models

interfaces.md, after:

# sqloquent.interfaces

## Classes

### `CursorProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface showing how a DB cursor should function.

#### Methods

##### `execute(sql: str, parameters: list[str] = []) -> CursorProtocol:`

Execute a single query with the given parameters.

##### `executemany(sql: str, seq_of_parameters: Iterable[list[str]] = []) -> CursorProtocol:`

Execute a query once for each list of parameters.

##### `executescript(sql: str) -> CursorProtocol:`

Execute a SQL script without parameters. No implicit transaciton handling.

##### `fetchone() -> Any:`

Get one record returned by the previous query.

##### `fetchall() -> Any:`

Get all records returned by the previous query.

### `DBContextProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface showing how a context manager for connecting to a database should
behave.

### `ModelProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface showing how a model should function.

#### Properties

- table: Str with the name of the table.
- id_column: Str with the name of the id column.
- columns: Tuple of str column names.
- data: Dict for storing model data.

#### Methods

##### `@classmethod find(id: Any) -> Optional[ModelProtocol]:`

Find a record by its id and return it. Return None if it does not exist.

##### `@classmethod insert(data: dict) -> Optional[ModelProtocol]:`

Insert a new record to the datastore. Return instance.

##### `@classmethod insert_many(items: list[dict]) -> int:`

Insert a batch of records and return the number of items inserted.

##### `update(updates: dict, conditions: dict = None) -> ModelProtocol:`

Persist the specified changes to the datastore. Return self in monad pattern.

##### `save() -> ModelProtocol:`

Persist to the datastore. Return self in monad pattern.

##### `delete() -> None:`

Delete the record.

##### `reload() -> ModelProtocol:`

Reload values from datastore. Return self in monad pattern.

##### `@classmethod query(conditions: dict = None) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Return a QueryBuilderProtocol for the model.

### `JoinedModelProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface for representations of JOIN query results.

#### Properties

- data: Dict for storing models data.

#### Methods

##### `@staticmethod parse_data(models: list[Type[ModelProtocol]], data: dict) -> dict:`

Parse data of form {table.column:value} to {table:{column:value}}.

##### `get_models() -> list[ModelProtocol]:`

Returns the underlying models.

### `RowProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface for a generic row representation.

#### Properties

- data: Returns the underlying row data.

### `QueryBuilderProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface showing how a query builder should function.

#### Properties

- table: The name of the table.
- model: The class of the relevant model.

#### Methods

##### `equal(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column = data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `not_equal(column: str, data: Any) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column != data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `less(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column < data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `greater(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column > data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `starts_with(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column like data%' clause and param, then return self.

##### `contains(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column like %data%' clause and param, then return self.

##### `excludes(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column not like %data%' clause and param, then return self.

##### `ends_with(column: str, data: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column like %data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `is_in(column: str, data: Union[tuple, list]) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Save the 'column in data' clause and param, then return self.

##### `order_by(column: str, direction: str = 'desc') -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Sets query order.

##### `skip(offset: int) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Sets the number of rows to skip.

##### `reset() -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Returns a fresh instance using the configured model.

##### `insert(data: dict) -> Optional[ModelProtocol]:`

Insert a record and return a model instance.

##### `insert_many(items: list[dict]) -> int:`

Insert a batch of records and return the number inserted.

##### `find(id: str) -> Optional[ModelProtocol]:`

Find a record by its id and return it.

##### `join(model: Type[ModelProtocol] | list[Type[ModelProtocol]], on: list[str], kind: str = 'inner') -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Prepares the query for a join over multiple tables/models.

##### `select(columns: list[str]) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Sets the columns to select.

##### `group(by: str) -> QueryBuilderProtocol:`

Adds a group by constraint.

##### `get() -> list[ModelProtocol] | list[JoinedModelProtocol] | list[RowProtocol]:`

Run the query on the datastore and return a list of results. Return SqlModels
when running a simple query. Return JoinedModels when running a JOIN query.
Return Rows when running a non-joined GROUP BY query.

##### `count() -> int:`

Returns the number of records matching the query.

##### `take(number: int) -> Optional[list[ModelProtocol]]:`

Takes the specified number of rows.

##### `chunk(number: int) -> Generator[list[ModelProtocol], None, None]:`

Chunk all matching rows the specified number of rows at a time.

##### `first() -> Optional[ModelProtocol]:`

Run the query on the datastore and return the first result.

##### `update(updates: dict, conditions: dict = {}) -> int:`

Update the datastore and return number of records updated.

##### `delete() -> int:`

Delete the records that match the query and return the number of deleted
records.

##### `to_sql() -> str:`

Return the sql where clause from the clauses and params.

##### `execute_raw(sql: str) -> tuple[int, Any]:`

Execute raw SQL against the database. Return rowcount and fetchall results.

### `RelationProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface showing how a relation should function.

#### Properties

- primary: Property that accesses the primary instance.
- secondary: Property that accesses the secondary instance(s).

#### Methods

##### `@staticmethod single_model_precondition() -> None:`

Checks preconditions for a model.

##### `@staticmethod multi_model_precondition() -> None:`

Checks preconditions for list/tuple of models.

##### `primary_model_precondition(primary: ModelProtocol) -> None:`

Checks that primary is instance of self.primary_class.

##### `secondary_model_precondition(secondary: ModelProtocol) -> None:`

Checks that secondary is instance of self.secondary_class.

##### `@staticmethod pivot_preconditions(pivot: Type[ModelProtocol]) -> None:`

Checks preconditions for a pivot.

##### `save() -> None:`

Save the relation by setting/unsetting relevant database values.

##### `reload() -> None:`

Reload the secondary models from the database.

##### `query() -> QueryBuilderProtocol | None:`

Creates the base query for the underlying relation.

##### `get_cache_key() -> str:`

Get the cache key for the relation.

##### `create_property() -> property:`

Produces a property to be set on a model, allowing it to access the related
model through the relation.

### `RelatedModel(ModelProtocol)`

Interface showing what a related model returned from an ORM helper function or
RelationProtocol.create_property will behave. This is used for relations where
the primary model is associated with a single secondary model.

### `RelatedCollection(Protocol)`

Interface showing what a related model returned from an ORM helper function or
RelationProtocol.create_property will behave. This is used for relations where
the primary model is associated with multiple secondary models.

### `ColumnProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface for a column class (for migrations).

#### Properties

- name: The name of the column.
- is_nullable: Whether or not the column can be null.

#### Methods

##### `validate() -> None:`

Should raise an exception if the column specification is invalid.

##### `not_null() -> ColumnProtocol:`

Disable null values for this column.

##### `nullable() -> ColumnProtocol:`

Enable null values for this column.

##### `index() -> ColumnProtocol:`

Should generate a simple index for this column.

##### `unique() -> ColumnProtocol:`

Should generate a unique index for this column.

##### `drop() -> ColumnProtocol:`

Should drop the column from the table.

##### `rename(new_name: str) -> ColumnProtocol:`

Should rename the column.

### `TableProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface for a table class (for migrations).

#### Properties

- name: The name of the table.

#### Methods

##### `@classmethod create(name: str) -> TableProtocol:`

For creating a table.

##### `@classmethod alter(name: str) -> TableProtocol:`

For altering a table.

##### `@classmethod drop(name: str) -> TableProtocol:`

For dropping a table.

##### `rename(name: str) -> TableProtocol:`

Rename the table.

##### `index(columns: list[ColumnProtocol | str]) -> TableProtocol:`

Create a simple index or a composite index.

##### `drop_index(columns: list[ColumnProtocol | str]) -> TableProtocol:`

Drop a simple index or a composite index.

##### `unique(columns: list[ColumnProtocol | str]) -> TableProtocol:`

Create a simple unique index or a composite unique index.

##### `drop_unique(columns: list[ColumnProtocol | str]) -> TableProtocol:`

Drop a simple unique index or a composite unique index.

##### `drop_column(column: ColumnProtocol | str) -> TableProtocol:`

Drop the specified column.

##### `rename_column(column: ColumnProtocol | list[str]) -> TableProtocol:`

Rename the specified column.

##### `custom(callback: Callable[[list[str]], list[str]]) -> TableProtocol:`

Add a custom callback that parses the SQL clauses before they are returnedf from
the `sql` method. Must accept and return list[str]. This is a way to add custom
SQL while still using the migration system. Return self in monad pattern.

##### `sql() -> list[str]:`

Return the SQL for the table structure changes.

### `MigrationProtocol(Protocol)`

Interface for a migration class.

#### Properties

- connection_info: The connection info used for interacting with the database.
For sqlite migrations, this is passed to the DBContextManager. For other
database bindings, the connection information should be read from env and
injected into the relevant DBContextManager.

#### Methods

##### `up(callback: Callable[[], list[TableProtocol]]) -> None:`

Specify the forward migration. May be called multiple times for multi-step
migrations.

##### `down(callback: Callable[[], list[TableProtocol]]) -> None:`

Specify the backward migration. May be called multiple times for multi-step
migrations.

##### `get_apply_sql() -> None:`

Get the SQL for the forward migration. Note that this may call all registered
callbacks and result in unexpected behavior.

##### `apply() -> None:`

Apply the forward migration.

##### `get_undo_sql() -> None:`

Get the SQL for the backward migration. Note that this may call all registered
callbacks and result in unexpected behavior.

##### `undo() -> None:`

Apply the backward migration.
